3 Iranian Travelers and the 
Production of Spatial Knowledge 

Recording the daily events in his book of memoir, on June 10, 1893, 
ʿIyn al-Saltanih, a Qajar prince and the Nasser al-Din Shah’s brother, 
mentioned the inauguration of the World’s Columbian Exposition, 
commonly known as the Chicago Exposition. Calling it the best exposition 
ever, he continues with a brief description of Chicago: 

The population of the city is 1,250,000 people […] This city is more beautiful 
than any other city in America and the West. For example, it has a 
street that is thirty kilometers long […] It has an amphitheater that can 
accommodate six thousand people. It has a hotel with five hundred units. It 
has twenty houses [?], ten banks, seven department stores, and thirty factories, 
and many other similar features. There are many apartments with ten, 
twelve, eighteen, up to twenty-four levels […] God has provided everything 
for the Westerners. The best houses in Iran have at most three levels; similar 
to the other things. It is kind of boring [here in Tehran].1 

There are three delicate points in this brief description. First, despite 
his previous trips to various European cities, ʿIyn al-Saltanih wrote 
these words having never actually visited Chicago in person. His 
description of the city was based on knowledge that he had acquired 
via other means. From the late eighteenth century, various sections 
of Iranian society, particularly the court and the elites, developed an 
acquaintance with European and American cities, their social lives, 
and spaces through direct visits, postcards, geographical texts, pictures, 
and other means of knowledge transfer. 

Second, as ʿIyn al-Saltanih’s brief description of Chicago demonstrates, 
the production of new spatial knowledge developed particular 
spatial and social norms. For example, ʿIyn al-Saltanih equalizes 

1 Qahraman Mirza ʿIyn al-Saltanih, Ruznamih-yi Khatirat-i ʿIyn al-Saltanih [ʿIyn 

al-Saltanih Memoir], ed. Masʿud Salur and Iraj Afshar (Tehran: Asatir, 1376 

[1997]), 1: 532–3. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



136 Iranian Travelers and Spatial Knowledge 

the beauty of Chicago to the length of its streets, the height of its 
buildings, the enormity of its hotels and theaters, and so on. These 
wonder-like descriptions by a nobleman from the royal family contain 
a normative quality, which renders the spatiality of Iranian cities, particularly 
Tehran, as dull and reproduces Western cities as lively and 
interesting. Third, Iranians’ exposure to new spatiality and sociality 
in the Western cities was not innocent. Alongside the transformation 
of urban society, this acquaintance resulted in the production of an 
influential spatial discourse that transformed Iranian cities as well as 
the state’s and the people’s spatial practices in the decades to come. In 
other words, in the long term, the formation of the socio-spatial discourse 
led to a power relationship between various sections of Iranian 
society and the spatiality of their daily lives. This discourse and the 
resulting power relations generated systems of exclusion and inclusion 
with vast social and spatial ramifications. 

This chapter primarily deals with the first two points; the next three 
chapters will examine the impact of the formation of this discourse on 
Tehran and the state’s and people’s spatial practices. The analysis of 
Iranians’ wonder-like appreciation of Western cities helps to illustrate 
how this novel spatial knowledge determined the future of Iranian cities. 
This chapter suggests that the post-1870s spatial transformations 
of Tehran had been incubated in Iranian society – at least among the 
elites and the Qajar court – for decades. I argue that these transformations 
were the outcome of the gradual formation and development 
of a spatial discourse, rather than an abrupt change and a sudden 
disjuncture from the past. 

I use a Foucauldian notion of discourse in this book. Discourses 
produce regimes of truth that naturalize particular understandings of 
the world. In the words of David Campbell, discourses “shape the 
contours of the TAKEN-FOR-GRANTED WORLD, naturalizing and 
universalizing a particular subject formation and view of the world.”2 
Michel Foucault, through his concept of the archaeology of knowledge, 
shows how in various socio-historical contexts there are substantial 
constraints on how people think and which govern “our will 
to know.” These discursive practices are closely linked to the exercise 

2 David Campbell, “Discourse,” in The Dictionary of Human Geography, 5th 
ed., ed. Derek Gregory et al. (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), 167. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Iranian Travelers and Spatial Knowledge 

of power and generate “a system of exclusion, a historical, modifiable, 
and institutionally constraining system.”3 In this view, certain implicit 
rules restrict people’s range of thought.4 

By adopting the Foucauldian conception of discourse, this chapter 
focuses on Iranians’ acquaintance with European cities, their social 
lives, and social spaces. There is a rich literature on the exposure of 
Iranian society to new ideas that originated in Europe, particularly 
Western Europe, and Russia.5 These studies demonstrate how Iranians’ 
acquaintance with the West played a great role in the formation of 
an intellectual group and reformers who were more aware of Europe 
and desired to transform Iranian society and the state.6 As Chapter 2 

3 Michel Foucault, “The Order of Discourse,” in Untying the Text: A Post-
structuralist Reader, ed. Robert Young (Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1981), 54. 

4 Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age 
of Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Vintage Books, 1965); Michel 
Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception, trans. 

A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon Books, 1973); Michel Foucault, 
The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1970); Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge and 
the Discourse on Language, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1972). 
5 Ali Gheissari, Iranian Intellectuals in the 20th Century (Austin: University 
of Texas Press, 1998); Ali Mirsepassi, Intellectual Discourse and the Politics 
of Modernization: Negotiating Modernity in Iran (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000); Negin Nabavi, “The Changing Concept of the 
‘Intellectual’ in Iran of the 1960s,” Iranian Studies 32, no. 3 (1999): 333–50; 
Negin Nabavi, ed., Intellectual Trends in Twentieth-Century Iran: A Critical 
Survey (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2003); Mehrzad Boroujerdi, 
“Gharbzadegi: The Dominant Intellectual Discourse of Pre- and Post-
Revolutionary Iran,” in Iran: Political Culture in the Islamic Republic, ed. 
Samih K. Farsoun and Mehrdad Mashayekhi (London: Routledge, 2005), 
20–38; Mehrzad Boroujerdi, “‘The West’ in the Eyes of the Iranian Intellectuals 
of the Interwar Years (1919–1939),” Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa 
and the Middle East 26, no. 3 (2006): 391–401; Mehrzad Boroujerdi, Iranian 
Intellectuals and the West: the Tormented Triumph of Nativism (Syracuse: 
Syracuse University Press, 1996); Shaul Bakhash, Iran: Monarchy, Bureaucracy 
and Reform under the Qajars: 1858–1896 (London: Ithaca Press, 1978). 

6 John H. Lorentz, “Iran’s Great Reformer of the Nineteenth Century: An 
Analysis of Amīr Kabīr’s Reforms,” Iranian Studies 4, no. 2/3 (1971): 
85–103; Hamid Algar, Mırz̄ 
ā Malkum Khān: A Study in the History of 
Iranian Modernism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973); Hamid 
Algar, “Malkum Khān, Ākhūndzāda and the Proposed Reform of the Arabic 
Alphabet,” Middle Eastern Studies 5, no. 2 (1969): 116–30; Fereydoun 
Adamiyat, Andishih-ha-yi Mirza FathʿAli Akhundzadih [The Thoughts of 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



discussed, the development of new ideas played a crucial role during 
the Constitutional Revolution. The Iranian intelligentsia were one of 
the main players in the uprisings at the turn of the century, and their 
role was crucial for the establishment of parliamentary democracy and 
the restriction of the court’s power.7 

The exposure to new ideas was not limited to the political landscape 
and had an impact on various aspects of Iranian society. In the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries, the growing relationship between Iran 
and European countries generated new forms of knowledge and transferred 
them to Iranian society. From culinary culture to the establishment 
of a new educational system, and from painting and theater to 
industrial and monetary organizations, various aspects of this impact 
have been investigated before.8 

Mirza Fathali Akhund-zadeh, 1812–1878] (Tehran: Intisharat-i Khawrazmi, 
1349 [1970]); Fereydoun Adamiyat, Andishih-ha-yi Mirza Aqa Khan Kermani 
[The Thoughts of Mirza Aqa Khan Kermani] (Tehran: Intisharat-i Payam, 
1357 [1978]); Fereydoun Adamiyat, Andishih-ha-yi Talibuf-i Tabrizi [The 
Thoughts of Talibuf-i Tabrizi] (Tehran: Damavand, 1363 [1984]); Mohammad 
Ali Jazayery, “Ahmad Kasravi and the Controversy Over Persian Poetry: 1. 
Kasravi's Analysis of Persian Poetry,” International Journal of Middle East 
Studies 4, no. 2 (1973): 190–203; Mohammad Ali Jazayery, “Ahmad Kasravi 
and the Controversy Over Persian Poetry. 2. The Debate on Persian Poetry 
between Kasravi and His Opponents,” International Journal of Middle East 
Studies 13, no. 3 (1981): 311–27; Nikki R. Keddie, An Islamic Response 
to Imperialism: Political and Religious Writings of Sayyid Jamāl ad-Dın̄ 
“Al-Afghānı”̄ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983). 

7 Gheissari, Iranian Intellectuals in the 20th Century, 13–39; Fereydoun Adamiyat, 
Fikr-i Dimukrasi-yi Ijtimaʿi dar Nihzat-i Mashrutiyyat-i Iran [The Idea of Social 
Democracy in the Iranian Constitutional Movement] (Tehran: Intisharat-i 
Payam, 1984); Fereydoun Adamiyat, Andishih-yi Taraqqi va Hukumat-i Qanun 
[The Idea of Progress and the Rule of Law] (Tehran: Khawrazmi, 1977); Mongol 
Bayat, “The Rowshanfekr in the Constitutional Period: An Overview,” in Iran’s 
Constitutional Revolution: Popular Politics, Cultural Transformation and 
Transnational Connections, ed. H. E. Chehabi and Vanessa Martin (London: I.B. 
Tauris, 2010), 165–91; Abbas Amanat, “Constitutional Revolution I. Intellectual 
Background,” in Encyclopedia Iranica (December 15, 1995), www.iranicaonline 
.org/articles/constitutional-revolution-i (accessed October 17, 2015). 

8 For a few examples of these studies, see: Rudi Matthee et al., The Monetary 
History of Iran: From the Safavids to the Qajars (London: I.B. Tauris, 2013); 
Willem Floor, Labor & Industry in Iran, 1850–1941 (Washington, DC: 
Mage Publishers, 2009); Willem Floor, Wall Paintings and Other Figurative 
Mural Art in Qajar Iran (Costa Mesa: Mazda Publishers, 2005); Willem 
Floor, Public Health in Qajar Iran (Washington, DC: Mage Publishers, 2004); 
Hassan Kamshad, Modern Persian Prose Literature (Bethesda: Cambridge 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Iranian Travelers and Spatial Knowledge 

In line with these works, this chapter analyzes the spatial knowledge 
that Iranians produced by becoming acquainted with European cities. 
For this purpose, the chapter examines the travelogues of Iranian travelers 
as a medium of knowledge production and transfer. During the 
nineteenth century there were other media that facilitated the transfer 
of spatial knowledge from Europe to Iran, such as Shahr-i Farang,9 
geographical texts, photos, and postcards. Unlike the other means of 
knowledge transfer, the authors of the travelogues experienced European 
urban spaces directly. In other words, Iranian travelers lived in 
the new spatiality – rather than being passive observers – reflected on 

University Press, 1996); Hormoz Ebrahimnejad, Medicine, Public Health and 
the Qajar State: Pattern of Medical Modernization in Nineteenth-century Iran 
(Leiden: Brill, 2004); Camron Michael Amin, The Making of the Modern 
Iranian Woman: Gender, State Policy, and Popular Culture, 1865–1946 
(Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2002); Stephanie Cronin, ed., The 
Making of Modern Iran: State and Society under Riza Shah, 1921–1941 
(London: Routledge, 2003); Ramin Jahanbegloo, ed., Iran between Tradition 
and Modernity (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2004); Willem Floor, The 
History of Theater in Iran (Washington, DC: Mage Publishers, 2005); Majid 
Mohammadi, Judicial Reform and Reorganization in 20th Century Iran: State-
Building, Modernization, and Islamicization (New York: Routledge, 2008); 
Houchang E. Chehabi, “The Westernization of Iranian Culinary Culture,” 
Iranian Studies 36, no. 1 (2003): 43–61; Maryam Ekhtiar, “The Dar al-Funun: 
Educational Reform and Cultural Development in Qajar Iran” (PhD diss., 
New York University, 1994); Maryam Ekhtiar, “Nasir al-Din Shah and the 
Dar al-Funun: The Evolution of an Institution,” Iranian Studies 34, no. 1/4 
(2001): 153–63; Mohammad H. Faghfoory, “The Impact of Modernization on 
the Ulama in Iran, 1925–1941,” Iranian Studies 26, no. 3/4 (1993): 277–312; 
Sasan Fatemi, “Music, Festivity, and Gender in Iran from the Qajar to the 
Early Pahlavi Period,” Iranian Studies 38, no. 3 (2005): 399–416; Farrokh 
Gaffary, “Evolution of Rituals and Theater in Iran,” Iranian Studies 17, no. 
4 (1984): 361–89; Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi, “Refashioning Iran: Language 
and Culture during the Constitutional Revolution,” Iranian Studies 23, no. 1/4 
(1990): 77–101; Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi, Refashioning Iran: Orientalism, 
Occidentalism, and Historiography (New York: Palgrave, 2001); Michael C. 
Hillmann, “The Modernist Trend in Persian Literature and Its Social Impact,” 
Iranian Studies 15, no. 1/4 (1982): 7–29. 

9 Shahr-i Farang literally means European city in Persian and refers to a device – 
a peepshow – for watching pictures of European cities, pornography, and 
exotic places. Vendors moved these boxes all around the cities to show the 
pictures to people and make some money. Staci Gem Scheiwiller has a valuable 
essay on the subject: Staci Gem Scheiwiller, “Cartographic Desires: Some 
Reflections on the Shahr-i Farang (Peepshow) and Modern Iran,” in Performing 
the Iranian State: Visual Culture and Representations of Iranian Identity, ed. 
Staci Gem Scheiwiller (London: Anthem Press, 2013), 33–54. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



their personal experiences, and recorded them in their texts. In contrast, 
the other means were passive representations of European cities, 
which were generated in Europe without passing through an Iranian 
filter. 

By regarding space as one of the constraints of thought, this chapter 
examines how Iranian spatial knowledge began its long-term process 
of transformation as the result of close acquaintance with an alternative 
form of spatiality. I argue that Iranian travelers encountered a 
new spatiality, so exotic and so different from their hometowns that it 
resulted in the formation of a new spatial knowledge. In this context, 
their travelogues contain traces of this knowledge, which is manifested 
in the overarching similarities between them. The discourse analysis of 
these texts reveals these similarities; they can be investigated by reading 
and analyzing the texts in search of common themes and, at the same 
time, contextualizing the analysis by looking back at Iranian cities of 
the time. The reciprocal reading of the texts, as constructed materials 
created in the tension between the two universes, Iran and Europe, 
reveals and explains the overarching similarities as the elements of 
new spatial knowledge. However, I should reiterate that travelogues 
were just one of the means for transferring new spatial knowledge and 
can be regarded as the most appropriate ones for textual analysis. 

The analysis of these texts reveals six main common themes, which 
cover a broad range of social and spatial items. The physical order of 
European cities, public life, nightlife, the presence of women in public 
spaces, and the relationship between power and cities are the main 
sources of wonder among Iranian travelers. The sixth theme is the 
common silences between the travelogues. For example, there is a deep 
silence on the downsides of European cities. Most of the travelers did 
not explore these cities entirely; as such, their reports overlook the 
harsh lives of the working classes. This incomplete impression resulted 
in the production of an unrealistic image of European cities and the 
excessive idealization of European urban life and spaces. 

The analysis of these texts provides clues about the general structure 
of the system of thought and knowledge in which Iranian travelers 
wrote their travelogues. This system of thought was the result of the 
socio-spatial tension between Iranian and European urban societies 
and cities. Iranian elites and the Qajar court were the main producers 
and receivers of new knowledge and, as Chapters 4 and 5 will discuss, 
they played a crucial role in the expansion and transformation of 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Tehran. In this view, the history of the 1870s expansion of Tehran is 
not necessarily the history of Nasser al-Din Shah’s (1848–96) decision 
to transform the city. The king of Iran was the subject of the greater 
system of thought; he was the subject of new spatial knowledge. He 
was not detached from this system. 

This framework admittedly overlooks the roles of individuals in the 
expansion of the city; instead, it demonstrates the significance of the 
impact of the system of thought and knowledge on the agents of history. 
The decisions of individuals were the products of this system; 
consequently, it is more important to know the systems prior to the 
agents, instead of ignoring the former in favor of the latter. This analysis 
provides the foundation for the next three chapters, which examine 
how this shared understanding developed into a full-fledged spatial 
discourse that transformed Tehran in the years to come. 

Iranian Travelers and Their Travelogues 

The nineteenth century witnessed a surge in the number of Iranians 
who traveled to European countries. Some of the travelers recorded 
the accounts of their journeys in travelogues. Some of these travelogues 
were published, a few of them were translated into European 
languages at the time, and many of them remained as manuscripts 
in libraries around the world. Iraj Afshar estimates that around 500 
Persian travelogues were written during the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries.10 The authors of Persian travelogues were not necessarily 
Iranians; people from India, the Transoxiana, and the Caucasus also 
wrote travelogues in Persian.11 

This section examines eight Persian travelogues from the nineteenth 
century. All of these travelogues were written by men; I did not find 
any Iranian women who wrote accounts of their journeys to Europe in 
the nineteenth century. Two main criteria were considered in selecting 
these particular pieces. First, I examined the accounts of travelers who 
went to Europe before the expansion of Tehran in the late 1860s and 

10 The twelfth and thirteenth centuries on the Islamic calendar: Iraj Afshar, 

“Persian Travelogues: A Description and Bibliography,” in Society and 

Culture in Qajar Iran: Studies in Honor of Hafez Farmayan, ed. Elton L. 

Daniel (Costa Mesa: Mazda Publishers, 2002), 149. 
11 Afshar, “Persian Travelogues,” 148. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



the early 1870s. I intentionally avoided the late nineteenth and the 
early twentieth century’s travelogues, when Tehran’s new northern 
neighborhood was fully formed and integrated into urban life. Second, 
while most of the travelogues were written by people who were part of 
the royal family or were assigned to travel on a mission by the court, 
to broaden the scopes of this research, I analyzed two travelogues 
from ordinary travelers who went to Europe at their own expense and 
who were not officially hosted by European governments. 

Table 3.1 presents the travelogues that are discussed in this section. 
They cover the period between 1799 and 1873. The latter date 
coincides with Nasser al-Din Shah’s first visit to Europe. I examined 
two travelogues from this trip: the king’s travelogue12 and that of the 
king’s brother, ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza Salur ʿIzz al-Dulih, which was 
written partly by him and partly by his scribe.13 Besides ʿAbd al-Samad 
Mirza Salur’s travelogue, Reza Ghuli Mirza14 is the other Qajar prince 
whose travelogue I examine here. He went to Europe more or less as 
an individual, but was often accepted as an official guest by European 
governments, especially Britain. 

Three travelogues belong to Iranian diplomats who traveled 
to Europe for official missions. Two of them, Hiyratnamih15 and 

12 Nasser al-Din Shah-i Qajar, Safarnamih-yi Nasser al-Din Shah [Nasser al-Din 
Shah Travelogue] (Isfahan: Sazman-i Intisharat-i Andishih, 1343 [1964]). 

13 ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza Salur ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih ʿAbd 
al-Samad Mirza bih Urupa dar Safar-i Aval-i Nasser al-Din Shah Qajar dar 
Sal-i 1290 Hijri Ghamari [Prince ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza’s Travel Diaries to 
Europe, Accompanying Nasser al-Din Shah in his First Trip in 1290 Hijri],” in 

ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza Salur ʿIzz al-Dulih va Du Safarnamih-yi U bih Urupa dar 
Salha-yi 1290 va 1300 [ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza Salur ʿIzz al-Dulih and his Two 
Travelogues to Europe in 1290 and 1300], ed. Masʿud Salur (Tehran: Nashr-i 
Namak, 1374 [1996]). 

14 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih-yi Reza Ghuli Mirza Navih-yi Fath ʿAli Shah 
Darbarih-yi Ahval-i Khud va ʿAmu-ha va Baradaranash dar Iran va Urupa va 
Vaqayiʿ-yi Sal-ha-yi Avval-i Saltanat-i Muhammad Shah [Reza Ghuli Mirza’s 
the Grandson of Fath ʿAli Shah Travelogue about Himself and his Brothers 
in Iran and Europe and the Events of the First Years of Muhammad Shah’s 
Reign], ed. Asghar Farmanfarmaʾi Qajar (Tehran: Intisharat-i Danishgah-i 
Tehran, 1346 [1967]). 

15 Mirza Abu al-Hassan Khan Shirazi, Hiyratnamih: Safarnamih-yi Mirza Abu 
al-Hassan Khan Ilchi bih Landan [The Book of Wonder, Mirza Abu al-Hassan 
Khan Ilchi’s Travelogue to London], ed. Hassan Mursilvand (Muʾasisih-yi 
Khadamat-i Farhangi-yi Rasa, 1364 [1986]). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Table 3.1 Iranian travelogues from the nineteenth century discussed 
in this section 

Travelogue Traveler Dates Main countries visited 

Masir-i Talibi 

Hiyratnamih 

Dalil al-Sufara 

Safarnamih-yi 
Reza Ghuli 
Mirza 

Chahar Fasl 

Safarnamih-yi 
Haj Sayyah 

Safarnamih-yi 
Nasser 
al-Din Shah 

Safarnamih-yi 
ʿAbd 
al-Samad 
Mirza ʿIzz 
al-Dulih 

Mirza Abu Talib 
Khan (ordinary 
merchant) 

Mirza Abul 
Hassan Khan 
Shirazi – Ilchi 
(Iran’s 
ambassador) 

Mirza Abul 
Hassan Khan 
Shirazi – Ilchi 
(Iran’s 
ambassador) 

Reza Ghuli Mirza 
(Qajar prince) 

Mirza Fattah 
Khan Garmrudi 
(Iran’s 
ambassador’s 
companion) 

Mirza Muhammad 
ʿAli Mahallati 
(ordinary 
religious 
student) 

Nasser al-Din 
Shah Qajar 
(king of Iran) 

ʿAbd al-Samad 
Mirza ʿIzz 
al-Dulih (king’s 
brother) 

February 1799 
to August 
1803 

May 1809–10 

May 1814 to 
February 
1816 

October 1835 
to April 
1837 

September 
1838 to 
February 
1840 

1859–77 

April to 
September 
1873 

April to 
September 
1873 

Britain, France, and the 
Ottoman Empire 

Britain 

Russia 

Britain 

The Ottoman Empire, 
France, and Britain 

Most of the European 
countries 

Russia, Germany, 
Belgium, Britain, 
France, Switzerland, 
Austria, Italy, and the 
Ottoman Empire 

Russia, Germany, 
Belgium, Britain, 
France, Switzerland, 
Austria, Italy, and the 
Ottoman Empire 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Dalil al-Sufara,16 belong to Mirza Abu al-Hassan Khan Shirazi, known 
as Ilchi. Hiyratnamih, or Book of Wonder, is the account of Ilchi’s 
travel to London in 1809 to meet King George and to establish a diplomatic 
relationship between Fath ʿAli Shah’s (1797–1834) court and the 
British government. Dalil al-Sufara contains the accounts of Ilchi’s trip 
to Russia after the first round of Perso-Russian wars and the signing 
of the Gulistān Treaty between the two countries. The court sent Ilchi 
to Moscow and Saint Petersburg to renegotiate the terms of the treaty. 
Ilchi’s travelogue to Russia was written by his scribe, Mirza Muhammad 
Hadi ʿAlavi Shirazi. It is more than a mere transcription of Ilchi’s 
words; rather, as Anna Vanzan claims, “it is almost entirely ʿAlavi Shirazi’s 
own production.”17 The third travelogue written by a diplomat 
is Chahar Fasl18 or Four Seasons, which is the account of the 1838 
travel of Mirza Fattah Khan Garmrudi, a companion of Muhammad 
Shah’s (1834–48) ambassador, Husayn Khan Ajudanbashi, to Britain 
to express complaints against the British minister in Iran. 

The last two travelogues, Masir-i Talebi by Mirza Abu Talib Khan19 
and Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah by Mirza Muhammad Ali Mahallati, 
known as Haj Sayyah,20 were written by independent travelers. Haj 
Sayyah left Iran when he was just twenty-three years old and, without 
any destination in mind, he traveled for eighteen years around the world. 

16 Mirza Muhammad Hadi ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara: Safarnamih Mirza 
Abu al-Hassan Khan Shirazi ‹‹Ilchi›› bih Rusiyyih [Dalil al-Sufara: Mirza 
Abu al-Hassan Khan Shirazi ‹‹Ilchi›› Travelogues to Russia], ed. Muhammad 
Gulbun (Markaz-i Asnad-i Farhangi-yi Asiya). 

17 Anna Vanzan, “Mīrzā Abu’l-Ḥasan Khan Šīrāzī Ilčī’s Safar-nāma ba Rūsīya: 
The Persians Amongst the Russians,” in Society and Culture in Qajar Iran: 
Studies in Honor of Hafez Farmayan, ed. Elton L. Daniel (Costa Mesa: Mazda 
Publishers, 2002), 347. 

18 Mirza Fattah Khan Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan Garmrudi 
bih Urupa Mosum bih Chahar Fasl va Du Risalih-yi Digar binam-i: 
Shabnamih va Safarnamih-yi Mamasani dar Zaman-i Muhammad Shah Qajar 
[The Travelogue of Mīrzā Abu’l-Ḥasan Khan to Europe which is Famous 
as Chahar Fast and Two Other Essays Titled as: Shabnamih and Mamasani 
Travelogue in Muhammad Shah Qajar Era], ed. Fath al-Din Fattahi (Bank-i 
Bazargani-yi Iran: 1347 [1970]). 

19 Mirza Abu Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi ya Safarnamih-yi Mirza Abu Talib Khan 
(1210 A.H) [The Talibi Path and Mirza Abu Talib Khan’s Travelogue], ed. 
Hussein Khadiv Jam (Tehran: Shirkat-i Sahami-yi Kitab-ha-yi Jibi, 1352 [1973]). 

20 Mirza Muhammad Ali Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah bih Farang [Haj 
Sayyah’s Travelogue to Farang], ed. ʿAli Dihbashi (Tehran: Nashr-i Nashir, 
1363 [1984]). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



He learned to speak five different languages and his trajectory took him 
to most European countries. His travelogue contains the accounts of his 
journeys to Europe. Afterwards, he went to the United States, where he 
spent ten years and became the first Iranian to receive US citizenship.21 
Unfortunately, the accounts of his travels in America have not yet been 
found. He returned to Iran via Japan, Southeast Asia, and India. 

Finally, Masir-i Talebi was written by Mirza Abu Talib Khan, an 
independent merchant who went to Britain in the late eighteenth and 
the early nineteenth centuries. It is the second oldest available Persian 
travelogue from Europe.22 This travelogue is different from the others 
in one fundamental aspect: Mirza Abu Talib Khan was born and raised 
in India, where he began and ended his journey. I used his travelogue 
for three reasons. First, Masir-i Talebi is one of the oldest Persian travelogues 
of Europe, and it provides an older picture of the continent than 
the available Iranian accounts. Second, as Sohrabi shows, in nineteenth-
century Iran there was a relative awareness about the travelers and their 
travelogues, and accounts of travels circulated between people in the 
country. For example, Sohrabi23 demonstrates how Mir ʿAbd al-Latif 
Shushtari, an Iranian history writer, incorporated information from 
Mirza Abu Talib Khan in his book, Tuhfat al-ʿAlam, to write about 
Europe. Finally, Mirza Abu Talib Khan’s different origin provides a 
valuable perspective for comparison with other Iranian travelogues. 

Four of the travelogues – Masir-i Talebi,24 Nasser al-Din Shah’s,25 
Hiyratnamih,26 and Haj Sayyah’s27 – have English translations. The 

21 Ali Ferdowsi, “ḤĀJJ SAYYĀḤ,” in Encyclopedia Iranica (December 15, 

2002), www.iranicaonline.org/articles/hajj-sayyah (accessed October 3, 2014). 
22 Afshar, “Persian Travelogues,” 152. 
23 Naghmeh Sohrabi, Taken for Wonder: Nineteenth-Century Travel Accounts 

from Iran to Europe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 15. 

24 Mirza Abu Talib Khan, Travels of Mirza Abu Talib Khan in Asia, Africa, and 
Europe during the Years 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802, and 1803, 2nd ed., 2 vols., 
trans. Charles Stewart (London: R. Watts, 1814). 

25 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M. the Shah of Persia during his Tour 
Through Europe in A.D. 1873, trans. J. W. Redhouse (London: Third 
Thousand, 1874). 

26 Mirza Abu al-Hassan Khan Shirazi, A Persian at the Court of King George 
1809–10, trans. and ed. Margaret Morris Cloake (London: Barrie & Jenkins 
Ltd, 1988). 

27 Mirza Muhammad Ali Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe: 
The Travel Diaries of Hâj Sayyâh 1859–1877, trans. Mehrbanoo Nasser 
Deyhim (Bethesda: IBEX Publishers, 1998). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



first two were translated into English shortly after their transcription 
in Persian, and the other two were translated and published in the 
contemporary era. In the process of this research, I analyzed the Persian 
texts of the travelogues. For the quotations cited, I compared the 
English translations to the Persian texts and used the English translations 
whenever they had relative accuracy; otherwise I translated the 
quotations into English from the Persian texts. 

The City and the Persian Gaze 

I saw the city of wonders, which forced me to forget all the other settlements 
I have ever seen. All the streets had the same two hundred foot 
width; they were paved with hard stones so elegantly that one could sit 
and rest upon them. The sides of the street were paved higher for pedestrians 
and the middle was paved lower for the movements of coaches and 
carriages, one side for coming and the other for going. And the buildings 
were about the same one hundred meters28 high, in four levels, built out of 
stone. The windows were placed in a way that made your mind go crazy, 
all opened towards the street and all looked exactly the same. Moreover, 
the rooftops were aligned exactly in the same line without any ups and 
downs. The doors opened exactly in front of each other, what magnificent 
doors with carved wood, and you could find the name of the owner of 
each building written by the door. I was going crazy, didn’t know where 
to look.29 

This is Reza Ghuli Mirza’s initial impression of Bath on his way to 
London in 1835. It contains many of the main features that fascinated 
Iranian travelers during their visits to European countries in the nineteenth 
century. Similar sentences are abundant in most of the travelogues. 
As this chapter discusses, the overarching similarities between 
various travelogues written over the span of seventy-five years are not 
accidental. They are the textual representations of a spatial knowledge 
produced through Iranians’ acquaintance with European cities. 

28 Reza Ghuli Mirza uses Zarʿ, which is a traditional Persian unit of 
measurement. One Zarʿ is almost one meter, more accurately 1.04, which is 
about 3.5 feet. As the number shows, there is an exaggeration in his accounts 
that is common among Iranian travelogues. 

29 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 338–9. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



This section presents the most prominent overarching similarities in 
six categories. As discussed earlier, this unique spatial knowledge was 
created in the spatial and social tension that the travelers experienced 
between European and Iranian cities. The accounts of the previous 
two chapters provide an image of the sociality and spatiality of Iranian 
cities in the nineteenth century. This account serves to contextualize 
the descriptions of Iranian travelers. 

A New Spatial Order 

One of the first impressions of the travelers was the physical order of 
European cities, which was manifested in qualities such as the straightness, 
length, and consistent width of streets. Most of the travelers were 
coming from Iranian cities with networks of labyrinthine, organic, 
narrow, and crooked passages.30 Straight, long, and wide streets, with 
organized façades on their sides, were in great contrast to the travelers’ 
former spatial experiences. 

Iranian travelers were fascinated by this spatial order. In many 
instances they equated the merits of a European city with its long, 
straight, wide, and clean streets: “Karlsruhe is a good and prosperous 
city. It has thirty seven thousand people with long and straight 
streets”31; “Brussels is a beautiful city, with long and straight streets”32; 
“the best city in the world is Paris. It is not just a city, better to say, the 
envy of paradise. Bright air, wide boulevards, streets as one can desire, 
and nice and kind people.”33 In these sentences, the travelers attached 
the merits of a city to its spatial order. A good city is a city with order, 
and this order was manifested spatially in its streets by being clean, 
straight, wide, and long. There are other aspects of this spatial order 
that are present more or less in all the travelogues, such as paving, 
the height of the buildings and number of levels, order of the façades, 
order of the trees, and many other physical qualities. 

30 It is important to mention that there were a few examples of urban design in 

Iranian cities that were based on straight streets and rectangular squares, such 

as the Safavid Shah Square and Chaharbagh Avenue; however, in comparison 

to the rest of the country these were indeed exceptions to the norm and by the 

nineteenth century most Iranian cities consisted of organic urban fabrics. 
31 Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 68. 
32 Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 80. 
33 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 210. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



The gap between the two universes is clearly recognizable in the 
terms that the travelers used for describing the new order. In other 
words, Iranian travelers’ familiar vocabulary was not efficient in 
describing the new spatiality. Iranians, nowadays, use Kūchih and 
Khīyābān as the main synonyms for street. Kūchih means alleyway, 
and people use the term to refer to the narrow streets of the cities. 
Khīyābān is a synonym for avenue and is usually used in reference 
to the main streets of cities. However, these terms were used differently 
in the context of Iranian cities prior to the late nineteenth and 
the early twentieth centuries’ urban developments. Khīyābān was part 
of the terminology of garden design, and it was used to name the 
straight passages in Iranian gardens with trees and flower beds at their 
sides.34 Later in the seventeenth century, the term was used in Safavid 
urban design when Shah Abbas I (1588–1629) built a new street in 
Isfahan called Khīyābān-i Chaharbagh.35 Chaharbagh was regarded as 
a Khīyābān because it had lanes of trees on its sides. Moreover, Chaharbagh 
was surrounded by the royal gardens of the Safavid courts.36 
Based on these instances, the major characteristic of Khīyābān is its 
straightness. The historic usage of the second term, Kūchih, was more 
related to the built environment of the cities and villages. In Dehkhoda 
Lexicon there are two main meanings for Kūchih that are related to 
the built environment: neighborhood and narrow passages of cities or 
villages.37 

With the tension between the nineteenth-century usage of these 
terms and the new spatial context, one can expect that Iranian 
travelers had to re-categorize their word usage in order to describe 

34 Parsi Wiki Open Dictionary, http://parsi.wiki/dehkhodasearchresult-fa.html?se 
archtype=0&word=2K7bjNin2KjYp9mG (accessed March 15, 2016). 

35 Sayyid Mohsen Habibi, Az Shar ta Shahr: Tahlili Tarikhi az Mafhum-i Shahr 

va Sima-yi Kalbudi-yi An: Tafakkur va Taʾssur [From the Shar to the City: 

Historical Analysis of the Concept of the City and its Morphology] (Tehran: 

University of Tehran Press, 184 [2005]), 93–6. 
36 For more information on Chāhārbāgh and Safavid urban spaces, see: Mahvash 

Alemi, “Urban Spaces as the Scene for the Ceremonies and Pastimes of the 

Safavid Court,” Environmental Design: Journal of the Islamic Environmental 

Design Research Centre 1–2 (1991): 98–107; Sussan Babaie, Isfahan and 

Its Palaces: Statecraft, Shiʿism and the Architecture of Conviviality in Early 

Modern Iran (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2008). 
37 Parsi Wiki Open Dictionary, http://parsi.wiki/dehkhodasearchresult-fa.html?se 

archtype=0&word=2qnZiNqG2Yc%3d (accessed March 15, 2016). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



European cities. Dalil al-Sufara, Ilchi’s 1814–16 journey to Russia, 
contains an interesting example of such a challenge. In his first 
encounter with a small city on his way to Moscow, the scribe writes: 
“[The city] has wide and long Kūchihs in the manner of Khīyābāns 
in front of each other.”38 Later, in another city, he writes: “[This 
city has] wide Kūchihs and Khīyābāns in front of each other.”39 And 
finally, in another instance, he mentions: “All the Kūchihs are built as 
Khīyābāns.”40 There is not a clear demarcation between Kūchih and 
Khīyābān in these sentences, which shows the confusion of the author 
about finding the right words to talk about the European context. A 
Kūchih as a Khīyābān points to the fact that the streets of the neighborhood, 
surrounded by buildings, were straight and wide, similar to 
the Khīyābāns of Iranian gardens. 

There is the same confusion in the other travelogues. Sometimes, 
Kūchih and Khīyābān are used interchangeably, and sometimes 
travelers use Khīyābān to talk about the streets with trees, without 
maintaining the same usage throughout their texts. For example, in 
Toulon, France, Haj Sayyah mentions that the best Khīyābān of the 
city is Strasbourg Boulevard, which is wide with trees and “superb 
buildings” on both sides.41 Later, in Dijon, he mentions that there are 
trees planted on both sides of all the Kūchihs of the city.42 This confusion 
shows that the travelers’ familiar spatial terminology did not suit 
European urban spaces. The travelers’ spatial consciousness belonged 
to another universe and adapting its available terminology to the new 
universe resulted in the innovative and diverse usage of old terms.43 

These readjustments of language to describe new urban spaces left 
a permanent impact on Iranians’ word usage and spatial imagination. 

38 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 57. 
39 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 70. 
40 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 71. 
41 Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 135; Mahallati, An Iranian in 

Nineteenth Century Europe, 108. 
42 Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 153. 
43 Much of this European urban design and the construction of straight and 

wide boulevards were relatively new in European cities as well; they were the 
spatial manifestation of European imperialism and global capitalism. For more 
information, see: Roger V. Gould, Insurgent Identities: Class, Community, 
and Protest in Paris from 1848 to the Commune (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1995); David Harvey, Paris, Capital of Modernity (New York: 
Routledge, 2003). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Chapter 4 will examine the 1870s expansion of Tehran. Through this 
expansion, the state incorporated the European vocabulary of urban 
design, and the reconfigured concept of Khīyābān manifested physically 
in the development of the city. Khīyābān and Kūchih gradually 
lost their traditional usage. Iranian urban society redefined its spatial 
language to talk about the new form of urban spaces. 

Although the Iranian travelers were fascinated by the new physical 
order, they did not limit their explorations to the physicality of European 
cities. They noticed novel social relations and recorded intricate 
patterns of social interactions in European cities. They meticulously 
recorded new forms of social life and spaces. Through these descriptions, 
they formed a new spatial knowledge that goes way beyond 
mere physicality and examines various socio-spatial relations in European 
cities. 

Public–Private Relationships 

Iranian travelers found that, unlike Iranian cities, the boundary 
between private and public spaces was not rigid and impenetrable. 
The private spaces of houses were accessible visually from public 
spaces and the latter was under the constant gaze of the former. 

There was a decisive physical demarcation between the private 
realm of houses and the outside world in traditional Iranian cities. 
Although Chapter 1 demonstrated that this boundary was socially 
porous for women, its physical manifestation was rigid and seamless. 
Moreover, the two realms were extremely gendered; the private realm 
was in women’s control and the main public realm beyond the private 
houses was dominantly masculine. Enclosed architecture was the 
key to such a dichotomy. N. P. Mamontov, a Russian missionary in 
Tehran, describes this dichotomy perfectly: “All the houses and gardens, 
which have beautiful interiors, are surrounded by mud walls 
[…] The streets are located amid the high walls of houses and look 
like long corridors. The reason for the isolation of Iranians is that 
they are scared of an alien male gaze at the private spaces of their 
houses […] One rarely find a real façade among the bare walls.”44 

44 N. P. Mamontov, Hukumat-i Tizar va Muhammad ʿAli Mirza [Tzar 

Government and Muhammad ʿAli Mirza], trans. Sharaf Al-Din Mirza 

Ghahrimani (Tehran: Ruznamih-yi Ittilaʿat, 1930), 26–7. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



The visual interconnectedness of public and private spaces was completely 
blocked. The bare walls of houses revealed no clue of what 
existed in the interior. 

Iranian travelers were aware of the fundamental difference between 
their homeland and what they experienced in the European context. 
While there is no direct description of the new experience, the texts 
are full of architectural elements that implicate the new relationship 
between public and private spaces. In Dalil al-Sufara, Ilchi describes 
Saint Petersburg’s residential architecture in these words: “Their 
houses do not have any space, pool,45 or garden,46 [in the middle] 
as Iranian houses do, and in their houses the sky is not visible.”47 
Later in the same paragraph he adds: “They have placed huge windows 
from glass all around the rooms, through which the streets are 
visible.”48 These words talk about a relationship between the interior 
and exterior spaces of the buildings that was new to the travelers. The 
extroverted architecture of European cities stood in contrast to the 
introverted Iranian architecture. There is a subtle comparison in these 
words between two different architectural styles. These houses did not 
have space or a courtyard in the middle and, as a result, people could 
not see the sky. Instead, they received light through large windows 
opening to the streets. The tension between the two different socio-
spatial understandings is manifested in the comparison between the 
architectural details of Iranian and European houses. 

Sometimes, like Ilchi’s description, the visual relationship between 
public and private realms is constructed from the interior toward public 
space. Nasser al-Din Shah describes his experience in Milan in these 
words: 

Dinner being concluded, we went to a window that faced the church and the 
square. At least twenty thousand individuals were congregated in this space. 
They had illuminated the whole church with Bengal lights, which produce 
different colours. At one moment the entire building from summit to foot 
was red; at another moment, green, yellow, or some other colour.49 

45 Ḥuż is a small pool of water at the center of the courtyards in Iranian houses. 
46 Bāghchih is a small patch of soil in the courtyards for planting fruit trees, 

flowers, or herbs. 
47 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 143. 
48 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 143. 
49 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 306–7. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



This was in stark contrast to Nasser al-Din Shah’s spatial experience 
inside his royal compound in Tehran. While in Tehran he had to hide 
behind the walls of his palace, here in Milan he could face a square 
and a magnificent church, the architecture of which he had spent 
pages admiring. Here he could witness an urban stage prepared by 
lights, crowds, architecture, and color. 

Iranian travelers also noticed and recorded their visual access to 
the interior of houses from public spaces. In the welcoming of Nasser 
al-din Shah to Turin, he mentions that “[g]reat crowds of women 
and men were in the streets and at the windows.”50 In the case of 
Ilchi’s reception in London, while passing through the streets in a carriage, 
he noticed that “the citizens of London heard the news [of our 
presence], they gathered in large numbers to see us pass. And when 
the ladies indoors heard the tumult, they came out on to their balconies 
to watch. We in turn were looking at them.”51 Mirza Fattah 
Khan Garmrudi and Haj Sayyah both noticed that the tall buildings 
of Paris were overlooking the streets through the windows. Garmarudi 
mentions that one can barely find a building whose windows do 
not open toward the street52 and Haj Sayyah, wandering aimlessly 
in the streets throughout the night, was fascinated by the charm of 
Haussmann’s Paris: “All the houses had gaslights [even up to the 
seventh floor].53 From the houses the sounds of piano and singing 
were heard.”54 

Similar to the novel spatial order, the new relationship between public 
and private spaces became a taken-for-granted norm in the future 
developments of Tehran and other Iranian cities. Initially, this new 
relationship was incorporated in the 1870s expansion of Tehran. As 
Chapter 4 will discuss, after the expansion of the city, the new northern 
neighborhoods provided land for the affluent people of the city to 
build their mansions with extroverted architecture. Instead of hiding 
behind their bare walls and viewing the sky from the hidden gardens 
inside their houses, Iranian elites turned the face of their residences 
toward the outside world. 

50 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 292. 
51 Shirazi, A Persian at the Court, 112. 
52 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 807. 
53 From the Persian text: Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 156. 
54 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 124. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



The Feminine City 

We arrived at the town of Baden-Baden after the sunset […] For lovers, 
pleasure-hunters, sybarites, it is a capital nook. Pretty women and graceful 
ladies continually promenade about its avenues, lawns, and hills, on 
foot, on horseback, and in carriages. In truth, it is a fairy abode.55 

These sentences are Nasser al-Din Shah’s first impressions of the small 
city of Baden-Baden in Germany. Similar to many other places around 
the continent, the king of Iran found the city a fairy landscape. Alongside 
various physical aspects – such as the new spatial order, the architecture 
of buildings, and the fancy shops around the city – the king 
particularly noticed the presence of women in public spaces. For Iranian 
travelers of the nineteenth century, European cities were in many 
ways feminine landscapes. Public life and spaces were populated by 
men and women, in stark contrast to the travelers’ familiar masculine 
spatiality back home. 

The representations of European women in Iranian travelogues are 
a noteworthy subject of investigation. Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi 
has several essays on the subject. He analyzes the image of European 
women in Iranian travelogues and demonstrates how this image 
formed the discourse of femininity inside Iran.56 However, in this 
chapter, the framing of European women themselves is not the matter 
of concern. My focus is the presence of women in public spaces 
and their relation with the city. This feminine, public presence was 
a source of wonder for Iranian travelers and it became a significant 
aspect of their new spatial knowledge. However, as it is discussed later 
in the book, in comparison to other aspects of the new spatial knowledge, 
the presence of Iranian women in public life and spaces took 
longer to normalize. 

There were four main spatial settings in which Iranian travelers 
came across European women: (1) parties, (2) formal ceremonies, 

55 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 113–14. 

56 Tavakoli-Targhi, Refashioning Iran; Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi, “Eroticizing 

Europe,” in Society and Culture in Qajar Iran: Studies in Honor of Hafez 

Farmayan, ed. Elton L. Daniel (Costa Mesa: Mazda Publishers, 2002), 

311–46; Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi, “The Persian Gaze and Women of the 

Occident,” South Asia Bulletin 11, no. 1/2 (1991): 21–31. Also see: Amin, The 

Making of the Modern Iranian Woman, 50–5. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



(3) venues related to the entertainment industry, and (4) daily urban 
life. The first two categories are dominant in almost all of the travelogues, 
with the exception of Haj Sayyah’s, who traveled individually 
as a poor unknown dervish. Although Mirza Abu Talib Khan traveled 
as an individual, he became famous as the “Persian Prince” during his 
stay in London and was repeatedly invited to parties. There are countless 
instances in which the Qajar princes spent days and nights at parties, 
masquerades, and balls. British noblewomen repeatedly invited 
Ilchi and Reza Ghuli Mirza to their parties. The general descriptions 
of women in these gatherings are concentrated around their beauty, 
clothing, and dances, wherein European women are usually compared 
to heavenly nymphs and angels. Mirza Abu Talib Khan goes further 
in his narratives and composes several sonnets for individual beautiful 
women whom he found pleasing.57 
In contrast, there are extremely negative and pornographic accounts 
depicting European women as lustful, shameless, and sensual people. 
However, the latter accounts should be read based on their specific 
context, particularly in the case of Iranian ambassadors. Most of these 
accounts are from Mirza Fattah Khan’s travel to London and Ilchi’s stay 
in Tbilisi. Mirza Fattah Khan accompanied Iran’s ambassador to London 
to submit complaints against the British ambassador in Iran and 
Britain’s interference in Afghanistan. However, they were ignored and 
humiliated by the British government, and all their requests were rejected. 
As a result, they returned to Iran without any significant success. Mirza 
Fattah Khan wrote a separate book, Shabnamih, the accounts of the 
night, which contains dark pornographic descriptions of British women. 
Through the narration of different stories, which he witnessed or heard 
from his friends, “Mirza Fattah constructed an image of the West centered 
on women and their sexual debauchery. He portrayed Europeans, 
both men and women, as irrational, immoral, and aberrant.”58 

The same attitude is recognizable in Ilchi’s travelogue from his trip 
to Russia. During his journey he had to pass through Georgia and stay 

57 For some examples, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 24, 36, 93, 115, 

159; ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 29, 73–4, 78, 91–2, 96, 151–2; Reza Ghuli 

Mirza, Safarnamih, 323, 361, 383, 394–5, 433–4, 497; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 

162–3, 189, 236, 240; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 775; 

ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 199, 226–7, 242, 244; Talib Khab, 

Masir-i Talibi, 34, 58, 109, 143. 
58 Tavakoli-Targhi, The Persian Gaze and Women, 24. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



for a while in Tbilisi. This travel occurred in 1814, between the two 
rounds of the Perso-Russian wars. During the first round, Iran lost 
Georgia and Tbilisi to Russia. Ilchi’s negative description of Georgian 
women could be an instrument to demonstrate how Georgian society 
had become decadent under the rule of Russia: “under Russian law, 
a woman has too much independence and she can do whatever she 
wants, and go wherever and talk to whoever she wants […] They can 
want whoever they want. Now the people of Tbilisi have adopted the 
same law and due to the Russian dominance no one can control his 
wife.”59 Based on Naghmeh Sohrabi’s60 view, this can be considered as 
an instance in which the travelogue was written more with an eye on 
the Iranian readership, to be used as propaganda inside Iran.61 However, 
these negative descriptions are mostly exceptions, reflecting the 
broader political context of the time. The general tendency among 
Iranian travelers was more inclined toward praising the beauty and 
sexual appeal of European women, rather than denigrating them. 

While the first two spatial settings – parties and formal ceremonies– 
are situated between the public and private realms, the next two, the 
entertainment industry and daily urban life, completely belong to the 
public realm of cities. Iranian travelers, from Haj Sayyah to Nasser al-
Din Shah, spent many nights in opera houses, theaters, circuses, and 
so forth, where they watched plays and shows performed by women. 
The notion of women’s presence at the forefront of the public entertainment 
industry was a new phenomenon for Iranian travelers. From 
nineteenth-century Iran there are accounts of dancing women at parties 
for men62 or even prostitution63 in Iranian cities; however, these 
cases – particularly in Qajar Iran – were underground activities or 
intentionally ignored by society and the state. 

59 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 29. 
60 Sohrabi, Taken for Wonder. 
61 Anna Vanzan has another assumption in this regard. She argues that in the 

case of Ilchi’s travelogues from his trip to Russia, one should differentiate 

between what Ilchi says and what his scribe writes, which means the 

travelogue reflects the scribe’s comments and ideas. Vanzan, “Mīrzā Abu’l


Ḥasan Khan Šīrāzī,” 356. 
62 Fatemi, “Music, Festivity, and Gender in Iran.” 
63 Willem Floor, A Social History of Sexual Relations in Iran (Washington, DC: 

Mage Publishers, 2008), 235–52; Jaʿfar Shahri, Tehran-i Qadim [Old Tehran] 

(Tehran: Intisharat-i Muʿin, 1371 [1992]), 1: 28–9. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



From the king of Iran to the dervish wanderer, Haj Sayyah, Iranian 
travelers obsessively recorded the shows and plays that they saw in 
Europe, even recording the names of the singers.64 On June 21, 1873, 
Nasser al-Din Shah writes: “They had sent expressly to Paris and had 
called from thence Patti, who is one of the renowned songstresses of 
Firangistan.”65 Similar to the parties and formal ceremonies, travelers 
were mostly attracted to the beauty of the women: “O my God! 
Paradise is exactly this place. If someone asks if the nymphs are real, 
[I will say] yes they are, I swear to God, I saw them with my own eyes. 
First, I could not believe they were human.”66 ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza 
Salur describes an opera in Russia. Unable to comprehend the broader 
social underpinnings that enabled women to be present in the public 
realm and work in the entertainment industry, the travelers’ descriptions 
objectified women largely based on their appearances and sexual 
appeal. 

The most important spatial setting where Iranian travelers came 
across European women was in their ordinary daily lives. Whether 
while visiting parks, going to the opera and playhouses, visiting factories, 
shopping in stores, or simply moving around the city in carriages, 
Iranian travelers recorded whenever they saw a European woman. 
Sometimes this acquaintance was very brief. This is particularly the 
case for the king and Qajar princes, who were accompanied in urban 
spaces by their hosts and did not have the chance to delve into the 
daily lives of passers-by. They could only observe the presence of ordinary 
women, without having any close conversation. For example, 
in Frankfurt, Nasser al-Din Shah observes, possibly from the hotel, 
that in the “mornings the wives of villagers bring in on carts fruit, 
vegetables, and the like, to sell; and form a market for these commodities 
opposite our quarters around the church. After a time, when all 
are sold off, they go away.”67 Moreover, the presence of women and 

64 For some examples, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 24, 41, 81, 95, 

124, 127, 159, 163, 200, 211, 242; Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 410, 430; 

Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 216, 228, 240, 331, 333; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi 

Mirza Fattah Khan, 787, 827, 829; ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 

188–9, 242; Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 88, 131, 162, 199, 271, 

291; Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 313. 
65 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 158. 
66 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 188–9. 
67 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 109. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



men in public spaces together was another source of interest for the 
travelers. There are many instances in which the travelers mention 
that men and women are walking hand in hand or kissing publicly. 
In the case of the formal ceremonies and parties, similarly, there are 
detailed descriptions of the dances and how men and women choose 
each other as their dance partners.68 

From private parties to public spaces, from opera houses to factories, 
and from queens and wealthy ladies to workers and prostitutes, 
there is a common point between all the patriarchal gazes upon and 
descriptions of European women by Iranian travelers: They objectified 
women. The public presence of women was just another aspect of the 
numerous beauties of a European city. European cities were charming 
because of their buildings, gaslights, paving, bridges, trees, streets, restaurants, 
and also their women. For the travelers, women were mere 
objects. It is not surprising that the king of Iran counts the beauties of 
Jardin Mabille, a garden in Paris, in these words: 

The garden is lighted up with lamps innumerable; there are beautiful avenues, 
basins of water, places like natural hills with cascades or waterfalls; 
and in the middle of the garden a pavilion where an orchestra performs. It 
also has coffee-shops and handsome apartments well lighted with lamps. 
Beautiful women of every description frequent this place, which is a curiosity 
in its way.69 

A pleasant public space contains pretty women in the same fashion 
that it contains pretty lamps, avenues, pavilions, trees and flowers, 
cafés, and so forth. These male Iranian travelers were unable to step 
out of their patriarchal discourse; they projected the same discourse 
over the European landscape by objectifying half of society. 

The only exception in this regard is Haj Sayyah, who, thanks to the 
lack of affiliation to the royal family, was free to experience various 
aspects of European society and talk with common people. He sees the 
broader social context that allows women to be relatively more active 

68 For some examples, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 159, 203; ʿAlavi 

Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 78, 96, 110, 152–3; Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 

360, 323, 394; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 76, 83, 162, 240, 315, 330; Garmrudi, 

Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 787, 807; Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj 

Sayyah, 131, 157, 253, 271, 291; Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 231, 272, 310, 

322. 
69 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 272–3. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



members of society and to live freer lives in comparison to their Iranian 
counterparts. Traveling on a train to Lucerne, he was accompanied by 
a young woman for several stations. The young woman lived by herself 
on a small income as a teacher in Zurich. Haj Sayyah records his 
feelings: “Again I thought of the people in my country and felt sad. In 
Europe a girl was safe and secure and lived and traveled freely, unlike 
the poor women of my country.”70 The relative freedom of women in 
European cities was in stark contrast to Iranian cities, which pushed 
Haj Sayyah to such a generalization.71 Despite gender inequality in 
European societies, in comparison to Iran, European women enjoyed 
more freedom and were privileged to access more social rights. 

Power and the City 

European cities displayed impressive spectacles of power to Iranian 
travelers, particularly the king and the Qajar elites. They provided spatial 
representations of power. For the king of Iran, European cities were 
prepared as magnificent stages. His trajectories inside the cities were 
carefully planned through wide streets and squares, with crowds shouting 
and waving their hands along his path, and with fireworks and gaslights 
shining during the nights. These well-organized spectacles and 
welcoming ceremonies were completely different from the Qajar court’s 
spatial strategies in Tehran. In the latter case the crowd had to leave the 
city and welcome the monarch at the city gates in a chaotic manner. 
Chapter 4 will provide a detailed examination of welcoming ceremonies 
in the Qajar court and how these ceremonies transformed as the result 
of the acquaintance of the Qajar elites with European models. 

Saint Petersburg was the first European capital that Nasser al-Din 
Shah visited during his trip. He describes his first official reception in 
a European capital in these words: 

70 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 182. 

71 However, this conclusion does not imply that there was gender equality in 

nineteenth-century Europe. There was vast social discrimination against 

women at that time. For more information on the gender inequality in 

nineteenth-century Europe, see: Bonnie G. Smith, Ladies of the Leisure Class: 

The Bourgeoises of Northern France in the Nineteenth Century (Princeton: 

Princeton University Press, 1981); Elizabeth Wilson, The Sphinx in the City: 

Urban Life, the Control of Disorder, and Women (Berkeley: University of 

California Press, 1991). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Both sides of the road, the balconies, and the roofs, were full of men and 
women, who shouted hurrahs. Incessantly did we and the Emperor bow to 
the people. For a while we drove on, until at length, passing beneath an arch 
and a lofty gateway we entered the square in front of the Winter Palace. In 
this square there is a very tall and stout column of stone, a monolith, bearing 
on its summit a statue in metal of the Emperor Alexander I.72 

There are certain spatial elements in this account: (1) a long, wide, 
and straight street, the name of which he mentions earlier, Newsky; 

(2) the presence of a well-organized crowd throughout his trajectory 
on either side of the street, in the balconies, and on the sidewalks; (3) 
an arch and a “lofty gateway”; (4) the palace square, or Dvortsovaya; 
(5) a stout column with the metal statue of Emperor Alexander I; and 
(6) the winter palace. 
One can find similar stages all over Nasser al-Din Shah’s travelogue. 
In Berlin, Paris, London, and many other European cities, he experienced 
the same landscape. Here and there he reflects on his wonders 
and shares the emotions produced through these spectacles. In the 
entry of July 5, 1873, when he was leaving Britain for Paris, Nasser 
al-Din Shah writes: “Large crowds were present, showing great regret. 
It was evident that the people of England were all sorry and grieved 
in their hearts at our departure.”73 Whether propaganda for the usage 
of his travelogue inside Iran,74 or a genuine reflection of his thoughts, 
one point is evident: the preparation of urban spaces for the reception 
of the Iranian monarch provided him with a new spatial knowledge. 
Nasser al-Din Shah found out that the cities could be arranged for 
the reception of royal and political guests. Being trapped in the labyrinthine 
fabric of his capital, with narrow and winding passages, he 
realized that cities could be constructed through a top-down process 
rather than a gradual organic growth. He learned that the cities could 
provide stages to spatially manifest the power relationship between 
the state and society. In this relationship, urban spaces dictate a particular 
order and orchestrate the scene to emphasize the centrality of 
the royal power. 

Such an understanding is clearly manifested in Nasser al-Din Shah’s 
1873 account of his visit to Paris: “The streets of Paris,—thus straight, 

72 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 42–3. 
73 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 215. 
74 Sohrabi, Taken for Wonder. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



broad, and level, together with the avenues in which trees have been 
planted so regularly and tastefully, were all planned and laid out on 
the instructions and under the supervision of M. Haussman [sic].”75 
As another example, Haj Sayyah describes Saint Petersburg’s streets as 
engineer-designed streets,76 or, in the same city, Ilchi describes how the 
harmony of the streets was the result of a strict top-down regulation 
of all the new and old construction: “Anyone who wants to build a 
house in the city […] takes the plans to the king […] if the design is not 
against the general order of the city, he gets the construction permits, 
otherwise he has to change the plans.”77 

Moreover, the travelers occasionally mention the ongoing maintenance 
and cleaning of spaces by certain urban institutions. For example, 
Reza Ghuli Mirza and Haj Sayyah mention how all the streets 
were cleaned and watered daily to prevent any dirt and dust.78 Ilchi 
describes the continuous process of cleaning and maintenance in Saint 
Petersburg, where streets, paving, trees, and all the elements of the 
city were repaired and kept working properly.79 Mirza Abu Talib 
Khan mentions that people should repair the façades of their buildings 
every two or three years to maintain London’s new and clean 
appearance.80 And finally, Mirza Fattah Khan mentions the annual 
income of Paris obtained through taxation and how this money was 
spent for the maintenance and cleaning of the city.81 There is a common 
point between these accounts: The state can be responsible for 
the wellbeing of cities. It needs to regulate various aspects of construction, 
growth, and the development of urban spaces. After the 1870s 
expansion of Tehran, the state implemented this new understanding 
through enforcing various guidelines for the city. These guidelines and 
the state’s attempts to regulate the city played a crucial role in the 
future transformation of Tehran. 

While European states arranged their capitals as magnificent spectacles 
for Nasser al-Din Shah, Iranian ambassadors had the chance 

75 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 250. 
76 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 327. 
77 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 144. 
78 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 344; Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth 

Century Europe. 
79 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 142. 
80 Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 184. 
81 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 806. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



to visit royal buildings. They could stand at the epicenters of cities’ 
spatial arrangements, looking from a balcony over long distances 
with carefully designed streets, buildings, trees, and gaslights pointing 
toward them. One of these occasions appears in Mirza Fattah Khan’s 
travel account of when he was invited to a formal reception in King 
Louis Philippe’s palace, probably Tuileries Palace, in Paris. After the 
meal, he accompanied the king to the balcony on the upper level. 
Mirza Fattah Khan takes three pages to describe the scene he witnessed 
from the balcony. He calls the view “one of the rare wonders 
of the era,”82 and he provides every detail of the trees, flowers, streets, 
and squares in the garden as well as the people, benches, fountains, 
statues, and the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel, which holds reliefs 
of Napoleon’s wars and victories. After providing a detailed account 
of the scenery, he adds: “the biggest virtue is that if one stands in 
the middle of the King’s room and looks outside, he will see the garden’s 
street and the city square and the streets outside the complex.”83 
These wonder-like sentences perfectly describe the experience of a 
new perspective developed by the Iranian ambassador. He experienced 
the power of the state over the rearrangement of Paris and how 
such rearrangements provided the state with the spatial manifestation 
of its power. 

Fast-forwarding thirty years, circa the summer of 1867, one can 
find another account of Paris, this time in Haj Sayyah’s travelogue.84 
Haj Sayyah, as an ordinary person, stands at the other end of this 
spectrum, wherein he was the subject of the spectacles and experienced 
the spatial power while wandering through European streets on 
his own. In contrast to Mirza Fattah Khan, who stood at the center 
of power and witnessed people’s presence in the spatial order, Haj 
Sayyah experienced the Parisian spatial arrangements as an ordinary 
person. He describes the preparation of Paris for the reception of the 
Ottoman Sultan: 

82 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 802. 
83 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 803. 
84 Haj Sayyah’s travelogue lacks the exact dating of events. The dates can be 

approximated via occasional clues in the text. In Paris, Haj Sayyah points to 

two events: first, the International Exposition in Paris, and second, Sultan 

Abdul-Aziz’s (the Ottoman Sultan) presence in Paris. These two events narrow 

the dates to the summer of 1867 and more precisely to the last days of June 

1867. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



All the streets were cleanly swept and sprinkled with water. The city was 
decorated [and they had built special decorative gates for the reverence of 
the Sultan]85 […] The streets were so crowded that it was difficult to walk, 
although they were about sixty to seventy paces wide […] Policemen were 
on guard at every intersection, preventing accidents […] Suddenly the shouts 
of “Long live the Sultan” were heard […] Men, women, and children were 
on the roofs of the houses and by the windows, watching […] The Sultan 
looked to the right and left and answered the greetings of the people with 
a wave of his hands. People were happy and remarked, “The Sultan is gracious 
and tactful.” Men took off their hats in respect as the carriage of the 
Sultan went by […] Turkish music [and song] was heard from most of the 
houses [as if they were obliged to play].86 

Here, the spectacle is similar to Nasser al-Din Shah’s description of 
Saint Petersburg. There are common spatial elements in both of them. 
While the king and ambassadors experienced these spectacles from 
the position of power, Haj Sayyah delved into them and experienced 
them from the point of view of an ordinary person. However, the 
significant point is that Iranian travelers, from the king to the dervish, 
were parts of these spectacles. It is inaccurate to separate them from 
these spatial arrangements and consider them as mere observers. They 
were part of the performances and practices that created the new spatial 
order. 

As a result, from Nasser al-Din Shah – sitting in a carriage with 
European kings and emperors and waving his hand to the people on 
the side of the street – to Haj Sayyah – standing on the side of the 
streets amid the masses receiving the kings and emperors – Iranian 
travelers developed a new spatial consciousness. They learned that the 
city has functions beyond the daily lives of its people. Cities can be 
prepared as grand stages where the plays of power and space keep 
people amused and legitimize the rule of the state. Monarchs and rulers 
can appear in these public stages; they do not need to hide behind 
their palace walls as sacred unattainable figures. They can arrange the 
whole city and its urban spaces to manifest their power and presence. 

85 Not in the English translation, added from the Persian text: Mahallati, 
Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 156–7. 

86 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 124. The sentences in 

brackets are not included in the English translation of the travelogue; I added 

them from the Persian text: Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 156–7. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



In short, Iranian travelers discovered a new spatial strategy that regulates 
the relationship between the state and society. In this strategy, 
the state arranges the spatiality of the city and orchestrates its public 
presence to consolidate its power. As the next two chapters will demonstrate, 
this novel understanding was clearly manifested in the 1870s 
expansion of Tehran and the transformation of the spatial strategies 
of the state. 

New Functions, a New Temporality 

In European cities, Iranian travelers found a new function for cities: 
city as the landscape of leisure and entertainment. There can 
be public organizations and spaces to fill people’s spare time. During 
the daytime, zoos, aquariums, museums, botanical gardens, and 
parks amused the travelers. From Nasser al-Din Shah to Haj Sayyah, 
they were deeply amused by these places. Reza Ghuli Mirza takes ten 
pages to describe all of the animals in London Zoo.87 Nasser al-Din 
Shah visited zoos in almost every city he went to. He provides detailed 
accounts of animals, how they were distinct from Iranian species, and 
their differences and similarities with what he had previously studied 
in zoology books.88 Similarly, there are detailed accounts of major 
European museums: London’s British Museum and Madam Tussauds, 
the Louvre Museum in Paris, and Saint Petersburg’s State Hermitage 
Museum are just a few examples.89 

European institutions of entertainment were fundamentally different 
from their nineteenth-century Iranian counterparts. As Chapter 1 
discussed, coffeehouses, zūrkhānihs, takīyyihs, and bathhouses accommodated 
the bulk of the social interactions in Iranian cities. However, 

87 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 373–83. 
88 Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 51, 65, 96, 156–9. 
89 For some examples, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 24, 26, 28, 39, 48, 

50–1, 55, 58, 80–1, 95–6, 100, 127, 133, 151, 153, 159, 161, 199, 200; ʿAlavi 
Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 87, 206; Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 359, 360–1, 
393, 400, 409–10, 428–9; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 142, 146–7, 173, 178, 216, 
228, 257–8, 260, 284, 296, 302, 330, 333; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza 
Fattah Khan, 787, 827, 829; ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 188, 
191, 198–9, 202, 204, 205, 212, 216, 218, 223, 229; Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi 
Haj Sayyah, 117, 122, 162–3, 161–2, 199, 202, 260, 291; Talib Khab, Masir-i 
Talibi, 76, 159, 188, 208, 313. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



unlike their European counterparts they were highly colored with 
communal identities and masculinity. While access to European theaters, 
zoos, museums, and so forth was, more or less, unrestricted for 
the public – considering the public as the entire population – Iranian 
spaces of entertainment and conviviality were highly confined to the 
social identity and gender of their users. 

As a result, Iranian travelers were free to visit various spaces of 
entertainment in Europe. They could construct their time to have fun 
without any restrictions. It is no surprise that travelers occasionally 
generalized their experiences, claiming that “Farangistan [Europe] is 
such a huge ʿīshratgāh [amusement park]”90 where “each person is 
relaxing and never thinking of the possibility of grief in his life.”91 
Clearly, this is a generalization and, as the next section discusses, Iranian 
travelers had an incomplete image of Europe. Behind their idealized 
images recorded in their travelogues, there were the harsh lives of 
the working classes. 

The analysis of the representations of nightlife reveals a new insight 
into Iranian travelers’ wonder toward European cities. They encountered 
a new spatiality that was not only stretched in its physical 
dimensions with wide, straight, and long streets, but was stretched in 
its temporal dimension as well. Thanks to gaslights – and later electricity 
– European cities were bright and lively even in the dark hours. 
This great wonder that inspired the Iranian travelers had two different 
sources: the illumination of urban spaces and the nightlife. 

A great deal of space in the travelogues is devoted to the use of gas 
and electric lights in urban spaces. Travelers provide detailed descriptions 
of how the gaslights worked;92 they distinguish between decorative 
lights and streetlights and explain their differences.93 They were 
fascinated by the huge chandeliers in the theaters, opera houses, and 
indoor shopping malls, such as the one in the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele 
in Milan94 or the Palais-Royal in Paris.95 Haj Sayyah describes 

90 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 208. 
91 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 409. 
92 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 328. Reza Ghuli Mirza describes how the 

gas is produced from the burning of coal in certain plants and is transferred 

through pipes to gaslights. 
93 Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 185, 218. 
94 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 98. 
95 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 808. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



a big N and three lines drawn out with lamps in Paris, which stood 
for Napoleon III.96 These words of ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza ʿIzz al-Dulih 
elegantly summarize this common wonder of the travelers: “Insomuch 
that there are gaslights burning in every street, it seems that night does 
not know this city [Paris] at all and sun never abandons the merry 
and virtue of this city by hiding itself at the sunset.”97 The fascination 
toward gas and electric lights would soon manifest in the 1870s 
expansion of Tehran. One of the state’s main projects was to install 
gaslights in all the main streets of the new city. The state attempted 
to reconstruct the image of the night-less European city through this 
undertaking. 

If the travelers were the observers of the gas and electric lights in 
European cities, they also joined the citizens in their nightlife. Most 
nights, Iranian travelers, particularly the king and those who were 
traveling as princes or ambassadors, went to operas, concerts, ballets, 
theaters, circuses, and so forth. They joined the crowd in cheering, 
having fun, enjoying the live performances, playing the role of spectator, 
and getting lost amid hundreds or thousands of people.98 It is not 
a surprise that they recorded these experiences in great detail, such as 
Haj Sayyah writing seven pages explaining every trick of a magician in 
Paris,99 Reza Ghuli Mirza writing six pages describing every scene of 
a theater in London,100 Nasser al-Din Shah, who enjoyed recognizing 
a play, recording the name of Don Quixote and Sancho,101 and Mirza 
Abu Talib Khan, who went further and recorded the architectural features 
of a theater building, including the architectural terms, and a 
sketch of the floor plan.102 

In contrast to the Qajar princes and the king, who mostly described 
the indoor nightlife of the theaters and the like, travelers like Haj 
Sayyah and Mirza Abu Talib Khan were free to explore the outdoor 
spaces of the urban nightlife. Haj Sayyah was particularly fascinated 
by Paris during the night. Moving from one café and restaurant to 

96 Mahallati, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 124. 

97 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 210. 

98 See footnote 89. 

99 Haj Sayyay, Safarnamih, 180–7. 
100 Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 363–69. 
101 Nasser al-Din Shah, Safarnamih, 39. 
102 Mirza Abu Talib, Masir-i Talibi, 75. The English translation does not contain 

the sketch. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



another, observing people playing music in the streets or in the cafés 
and restaurants, joining others in a garden to see a play or some magician’s 
tricks, getting a carriage and passing through urban nightlife, 
Haj Sayyah built an exceptional experience that he describes in these 
words: 

Whatever I saw that night I had never seen elsewhere. All the city looked 
like jewelry […] There were music and singing in coffee shops and theaters. 
They were all full, with no place to sit […] The trees were festooned with 
green lights. Musicians played, and young people and children danced […] 
After one hour fireworks began […] In all Paris I did not see anyone with 
dirty clothes […] Anyway that night ended and made me more mature, 
seeing men attain such a degree of perfection […] I could not sleep. I was 
thrilled to be in Paris.103 

By reading between the lines of Haj Sayyah’s descriptions and 
examining Iranian travelers’ wonder-filled sentences, an important 
point emerges that is beyond a mere fascination toward entertainment, 
gaslights, and urban nightlife. It is the fascination toward the public 
life of people in a shared spatiality. Iranian travelers experienced a 
particular sociality of European cities that was represented spatially 
in the forms of public entertainment. In contrast to the communal 
practices of Iranian urban society, which were small-scale gatherings 
in interior spaces, in Europe travelers witnessed the spatial manifestations 
of collective amusement. Back home, as the next chapter will 
discuss, there were few state-sponsored ceremonies that could gather 
the masses together for a collective activity. The main two were the 
qurbān camel sacrifice rituals and the royal taʿzīyihs in Takīyyih Duwlat. 
However, even those collective activities were further divided by 
communal identities and factional strife. Despite people’s collective 
presence in a shared space, they were still able to reproduce their communal 
ties. In contrast, in London and Paris Iranians could get out and 
join the crowd. They were able to get lost amid the crowd, become a 
person like others, and enjoy various types of public entertainment 
without the constant need to redefine their social identity. 

Soon after the 1870s expansion of Tehran, the state and Qajar elites 
attempted to introduce European-style forms of entertainment to the 
new city. Lacking the social context, these early attempts were doomed 

103 Haj Sayyah, An Iranian in Nineteenth Century Europe, 125–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



to failure. However, as Chapter 5 will show, half a century later and 
via the development of the modern middle class in Iranian cities, European 
types of entertainment and public life became an ever-present 
aspect of Iranian cities, particularly Tehran. By the mid-twentieth 
century, no one remembered the wonders of the king of Iran or the 
poor dervish toward these, by now, taken-for-granted activities. 

Silences 

Coding the text of the travelogues based on their common themes 
resulted in what has been reviewed to this point. However, the overarching 
silences in the texts provide additional insight into the common 
understanding of European cities by Iranian travelers. Two 
points in Haj Sayyah’s final quotation from the previous section help 
to articulate this point: Paris as a piece of jewelry and Paris as a city 
without any dirty people. 

Iranian travelers mostly saw just one side of European cities. They 
saw the wealth, order, cleanliness, and health without realizing that 
beneath the surface of this paradise the poor and harsh lives of the 
working classes existed, which is depicted in novels and books such 
as Charles Dickens’s Oliver Twist and A Tale of Two Cities or Friedrich 
Engels’s The Condition of the Working Class in England. This 
incomplete realization of the social lives of European cities pushed the 
travelers to the extreme wherein they equated Europe with paradise: 
“The sides of the Rhine River are the paradise of farangistan, and 
farangistan is the paradise of the world with its gardens, buildings, 
palaces, and pavilions”;104 “Honestly, London is the most beautiful 
city on the planet […] In all the aspects of urbanism, such as architecture, 
streets, gardens, churches, factories, schools, theaters, and the 
like, it is much better than Paris, which in its turn it is the best city of 
Farangistan.”105 Although Naghmeh Sohrabi106 argues that sometimes 
the wonder in the language and exaggerations in the descriptions were 
part of the literary genre of nineteenth-century travelogues, the deep 
silence on the downsides of European social life is still a notion that 
deserves more attention. 

104 ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 193. 
105 Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 822. 
106 Sohrabi, Taken for Wonder. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Then again, there is not consistency among all the travelogues in 
this regard. Haj Sayyah and Mirza Abu Talib Khan, as independent 
travelers, provide the readers with a more realistic view of European 
societies. They had the chance to see both affluent and impoverished 
neighborhoods and the poor, beggars, and workers more than the 
other travelers did. This is more apparent in the case of Haj Sayyah 
as he visited a greater number of European countries. Particularly, 
during his journeys in Italy and Russia, he suffered hardship. The lack 
of safety and the presence of thieves, prostitutes, beggars, and poor 
children in towns and cities are abundant amid his accounts. He was 
robbed twice and lost almost all of his belongings. Similarly, Mirza 
Abu Talib Khan witnesses the poverty of Irish peasants and writes: 

The poverty of the peasants, or common people, in this country, is such, 
that the peasants of India are rich when compared to them […] they never 
wear a shoe […] I was informed, that many of these people never taste meat 
during their lives, but subsist entirely upon potatoes; and that, in the farm 
houses, the goats, pigs, dogs, men, women, and children, lie all together. 
Whilst on our journey, the boys frequently ran for miles with the coach, in 
hopes of obtaining a piece of bread.107 

While there are a few instances of descriptions of poverty and dire 
living conditions in the independent travelers’ accounts, the accounts 
of the Qajar king, princes, and ambassadors are relatively silent in 
this regard. They were escorted everywhere and their trajectories were 
planned carefully inside the cities. Even when they had limited independence, 
they merely visited upscale parts of cities on their own. 
Sometimes they were able to see workers and the poor, but their 
observations were from a distance, seeing people standing on the 
sides of the streets with poor faces and clothing, and no more elaboration 
was recorded. For example, in Liverpool, Nasser al-Din Shah 
observes: “In proportion to the inhabitants of London, many more 
poor people were noticed in these parts, on whose countenances were 
visibly stamped the signs that they obtained a living with difficulty.”108 
Consequently, European cities are largely depicted unrealistically in 
these travelogues and they are mostly illustrated as paradises without 
any pain, poverty, danger, or violence. 

107 Talib Khan, Travels of Mirza Abu Talib, 106–7. 
108 Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 177–8. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Through the examination of the 1870s expansion of Tehran, the 
next chapter will illustrate how the idealization of European cities, 
their public lives, and spaces manifested physically in the city. For the 
first time in the history of Iranian urbanism, a new vocabulary of urban 
design was incorporated for the new city. European-style streets and 
boulevards with gaslights, tramways, and stores constituted the spatial 
structure of the new city. During the next eight decades after the expansion 
of Tehran, the new city developed a novel sociality different from 
the traditional social life of Iranian cities. In comparison to mere spatial 
manifestation of European urbanism, it took Tehran much longer to 
foster an alternative social life. By the mid-twentieth century, the new 
spatial regime of knowledge became the dominant spatial discourse 
in Iranian urbanism, dictating the spatiality of cities, their social lives, 
and their spaces. Various socio-spatial relationships of Iranian cities 
underwent massive transformations, and Tehran and other cities began 
a new trajectory that defined their future in the years to come. 

There is another silent area in travelogues. Travelers occasionally 
use comparisons with Iran to describe different aspects of European 
societies, landscapes, climates, and so forth. By drawing on the similarities 
and differences between common cases in Europe and Iran, 
they summarize paragraphs in just a few sentences.109 Travelers even 
compare the two universes on more critical topics, such as political 
issues and women, especially the latter, which is their favorite topic.110 
While comparisons are abundant in all the travelogues, they are 
largely silent when they reach cities and urban spaces. In other words, 
there are not significant comparisons between Iranian cities and urban 
spaces and their European counterparts. There are a few comparisons 
on the architecture of buildings, especially the interior arrangements 
of spaces, but on a larger scale there is relative silence. 

109 For some examples, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, The Diary of H.M., 113, 

279; ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 216; Nasser al-Din Shah, 

Safarnamih, 47, 116, 167, 222, 232; ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 71, 73, 

143; Reza Ghuli Mirza, Safarnamih, 449; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 81, 240, 256, 

280, 304–5, 325, 326; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 773, 

817; ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi Shahzadih,” 192; Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi 

Haj Sayyah, 121, 147, 171, 178, 197, 215, 258, 291, 298. 
110 ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 148; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 105, 163, 180, 

315; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi Mirza Fattah Khan, 754, 755; Mahallati, 

Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 85, 244–5. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



One may claim that since cities and urban spaces are large-scale entities, 
we should not expect any comparison in this regard. In response, 
the travelers are not completely silent in comparing the cities and their 
spaces. On the contrary, there are many instances in which they compare 
European cities to each other. This is particularly the case with 
London and Paris, as if these two cities are the origins that the virtue 
of other European cities should be compared to.111 However, there is 
no significant cross-continental comparison between Iran and Europe 
in this regard.112 

The only exception is Mirza Abu Talib Khan’s travelogue. Unlike 
the others, he depends greatly on the similar urban spaces in India 
to describe European urban spaces: “Of the admirable inventions of 
British are square and park […] Park is similar to Hindi’s ramna […] 
but square is an equivalent to Hindi’s cauka, but India’s cauka belongs 
to the market, and this one is different, there are houses or high class 
stores around it, and its middle is for walking.”113 As this example 
shows, Mirza Abu Talib Khan uses urban spaces in Indian cities as 
examples to introduce British urban spaces properly. 

Why did Iranian travelers not use the same method as Mirza Abu 
Talib Khan does? Or, on the contrary, why is the same silence not 
present in Mirza Abu Talib Khan’s travelogue? It is not possible to 
provide a definite answer to these questions. One possibility is that the 
great difference between Iranian cities and their European counterparts 
made them belong to two different universes, which demanded 

111 For a comparison of European cities with each other, see: Nasser al-Din Shah, 
Safarnamih, 28, 47, 211, 249; ʿAlavi Shirazi, Dalil al-Sufara, 72, 80, 133, 
146; Shirazi, Hiyratnamih, 123, 192, 276, 293; Garmrudi, Safarnamih-yi 
Mirza Fattah Khan, 793, 806–7, 822; ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi 
Shahzadih,” 197–9, 210, 222, 232; Mahallati, Safarnamih-yi Haj Sayyah, 
137–8, 159, 259, 284, 315, 467, 502, 525. 

112 The only case of comparison between Iranian urban spaces to their counterparts 
in another country is a very short sentence in ʿAbd al-Samad Mirza 
Salur’s travelogue. However, in this case he compares Istanbul’s streets 
to Tehran’s, which resembled each other to some extent: “After the lunch 
we went to Istanbul visiting Hagia Sophia. The streets were so dirty and 
bad, similar to Tehran.” In this case, the spatial contexts of the two cities 
resemble each other; Mirza Salur does not experience Istanbul as an alien 
landscape that is deeply different from Tehran. ʿIzz al-Dulih, “Safarnamih-yi 
Shahzadih,” 234. 

113 Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 185. The Hindi words are not available in the 
English translation. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



two different languages and two different forms of spatial consciousness 
to comprehend and describe. Iranian urban life and spaces were 
so different from their European counterparts that it made it hard to 
draw cross-continental connections between them. However, the case 
of India was different. The colonial presence and practices in India 
had generated spaces based on European, or more specifically British, 
spatial consciousness. As a result, Mirza Abu Talib Khan could trace 
similarities between Calcutta in India, London, and even Cape Town 
in South Africa.114 

As the next chapter argues, the disjunction between European and 
Iranian spatial forms is clearly manifested in the 1870s expansion of 
Tehran. The state constructed its desired European image on the north 
side of the old town, completely detached from it; the two forms could 
not merge over each other. They had two different characters and they 
stood side by side, respecting each other. However, after the construction 
of the new city a dialog gradually developed between the two 
cores. In the 1920s and 1930s this dialog further transformed into a 
monologue. The new city and the new regime of knowledge superimposed 
its spatiality and sociality over the old one. The respectful 
disjunction between the two universes transformed into a fully-fledged 
power relationship with destructive consequences. 

Conclusion 

European cities were like mirrors in which Iranian travelers could see 
what was absent in their cities back home. The travelers pointed out 
and documented the elements that they could not find in Iranian cities. 
However, it is critical to avoid creating sets of binary oppositions. At 
this point, this chapter does not intend to establish binary oppositions 
between European and Iranian cities or European urban spaces and 
their counterparts in Iran. Binary oppositions are value-laden. They 
define one element as the origin and the other as subordinate. Mentioning 
differences between public and private spaces, the presence 
of women in public spaces, public life, nightlife, and so on does not 
necessarily mean that the two universes were opposing entities; it does 
not mean that they were standing on different sides of a spectrum. 

114 Talib Khan, Travels of Mirza Abu Talib, 79; Talib Khab, Masir-i Talibi, 33. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Actually, there is no spectrum at all. The spectrum view easily traps 
the analysis in the modernist discourse of space in which there is a single 
path, called modernism, and a single destination, called European 
or Western cities.115 This chapter argues that the two universes were 
two different manifestations of human civilizations, which formed for 
thousands of years in relative isolation and that, from a certain point 
in time, interconnections between them started to emerge. They were 
simply different rather than opposites. 

It would be naive to think that the spatial consciousness of Iranian 
society changed because of the travelogues or because of any 
other means of knowledge transformation. However, it is more accurate 
to say that Iranians, or at least the elites and the Qajar court, 
generated an alternative spatial knowledge to the one they had lived 
and experienced in Iran. Generating new knowledge does not mean 
that society became alienated from its long-lived spaces. For Iranians, 
the new European spatiality116 was an independent entity, different 
from the traditional Iranian one. As the next chapter will show, these 
two modes of spatiality could not be merged at that time; they were 
just two different universes that could be juxtaposed to each other. 
In other words, at this point, we cannot construct a power relation 
between the two forms of knowledge. These two were so separate 
and different that it would be inaccurate to claim and generalize with 
certainty that Iranian society preferred European spaces over their 
own familiar ones. However, from the moment that, during the 1870s 
expansion of Tehran, new neighborhoods were constructed based on 
the novel spatial knowledge, the trajectory of events changed. When 
the new consciousness was physically implemented, it came to be in a 
direct dialog with the old one. 

115 Doreen Massey, For Space (Los Angeles: Sage, 2005), 66–9. 

116 It is essential to recall that the European spatiality which fascinated Iranians 

was relatively new and in the process of becoming. The history of the urban 

forms of major European cities – London, Paris, Berlin, Rome, and many 

others – shows their massive transformations during the eighteenth and 

nineteenth centuries. Prior to that, many European cities were based on their 

medieval networks of streets and squares. For more information on the his


tory of European cities, see: A. E. J. Morris, History of Urban Form: Before 

the Industrial Revolution, 3rd ed. (London: Routledge, 2013); Leonardo 

Benevolo, The History of the City, trans. Geoffrey Culverwell (Cambridge, 

MA: MIT Press, 1980). 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



Finally, as Chapter 4 will illustrate, the conformity of the 1870s 
expansion of Tehran with the main principles of the new spatial 
knowledge shows that spatial meanings can be incubated in the collective 
consciousness of a society, or in a section of a society, for a long 
time before they are physically manifested. The relational theories of 
space introduce a dynamic framework for the analysis of spaces. In 
these theories, spatial meanings are outcomes of the constant interrelations 
and negotiations between various social trajectories. Social 
space is a social product and it should be analyzed through its sociality. 
As a result, it is not possible to attach a fixed meaning to a place. 
The meanings are in a constant process of changing; they exist and 
coexist together, and they negotiate to produce new spatial meanings. 
Through this research, I argue that, even prior to the physical production 
of spaces, social trajectories can negotiate their desired spatial 
meanings. In the case of Tehran and Iranian urban society, spaces 
began their social lives many years before their physical production; 
they were in the process of becoming decades before the expansion of 
Tehran. 

The next three chapters will discuss the impact of the production 
of new spatial knowledge on the spatiality and sociality of Tehran. 
After its initial physical manifestation through the 1870s expansion 
of Tehran, this spatial knowledge gradually changed into a dominant 
socio-spatial discourse. What follows will examine the impact of this 
discourse on the quadruple spatial relationships in Tehran. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009188906.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press 



